DetailsNew search
            Subject:GRID: DEM & slope problems
            Sender:Domenico Capolongo 
            Date:1999/02/23

              I am here summarizing the responces I had regarding my DEM 
              problems.

              Many thanks to the following for responding:

              Andrew Loughhead
              Chris Ducan
              Steve Haymes
              Peter Hall
              karl Heidemann
              James Long
              Eric Pyle


              It seems that I am dealing with a long-standing, very challenging
              problem for which there is still no "best" solution.
              The are some different way to choose from to try to overcome this
              problem. They depend up on your needs.

              Organization:
              INITIAL QUESTION
              THE DATA
              THE PROBLEM
              THE BACKGROUND
              THE SOLUTIONS PROPOSED AND HOW THEY WORKED FOR ME
              COMMENTS




              INITIAL QUESTION

              >
              > I imported a contour map (originaly created in autocad) in A/I 
              (v.
              > 7.0.2)
              >
              > Using the topogridtool AML l derived a DEM from the contour map.
              >
              > After creating the lattice I derived a slope grid and a
              > hillshade grid.
              >
              > Looking at this grid (especially the slope) I found that the
              > contours are still visible instead of having a smooth surface as 
              i
              > was expecting.
              >
              > Looking at the histogram of the DEM, picks in correspondence of 
              the
              > contours value are visible
              >
              > I have filtered the DEM twice with the arc command FILTER (low
              > option) and i also filled the sink with FILL command in grid but 
              i
              > still have the same problem.
              >
              > thanks in advance for help
              >

              THE DATA
              Contour map at 1:25000 scale of a mountainous area of Southern
              Appenines (Italy). The scale is 1:25000, contour interval 25 m,
              horizontal contour spacing between 2 mm (in the ridge area) and
              5-7 mm ( in the valley floor).
              It's interpolating the valley floor that I have the major problem
              (peaks at contour value in the histogram and contour like bands in
              the slope map).


              THE PROBLEM

              The TOPOGRID is a version of ANUDEM (http://cres.anu.edu.au/). 
What
              I am seeing is a known problem with ANUDEM.
              Basically, as reported in the A/I reference, "There is a slight 
              biasing
              in the interpolation algorithm that causes input contours to have 
a
              stronger effect on the output surface at the contour. This bias 
can
              result in a slight 'flattening' of the output surface as it 
crosses
              the contour. This may result in misleading results when 
calculating
              the profile curvature of the output surface."
              Further I am using an old version of TOPOGRID. Some Improvements 
              have
              been introduced with version 7.1.


              BACKGROUND

              I report here a list and some comments emailed to me by Chris 
Ducan
              [ducan@geo.unmass.edu] of some tools that can be used to convert 
an
              incomplete representation of a continuous surface (especially a
              physical, topographic, erosional surface) to a continuous
              representation (ie, points and/or contours --> grid).

              [IDW (inverse distance weighting), in which points (can be 
vertices
              of your contour lines or others) are averaged, with a 
              user-specified
              inverse-distance weighting (you can specify the rate of fall-off 
              with
              distance), within a user-specified radius or with a user-specified 
              number
              of points. This can produce fairly smooth surfaces (especially 
with
              larger radius or # points), and the interpolated values are never 
              outside
              the range of the original data, but the result is not very 
              faithful to
              what real, erosional landscapes look like.

              SPLINE interpolation, which produces very visually pleasing, 
smooth
              (continuously differentiable) surfaces based on spline fitting of 
              the
              control points, but which can produce data values outside the 
              range of
              the original data (sometimes wildly outside their range!), and 
              again is
              not particularly good representation of erosional landscapes.

              TIN (triangular irregular network) represents the surface as a set 
              of
              triangular, flat facets. It is relatively efficient 
              computationally and
              in terms of memory, has interpolated values within the range of 
the
              original control points, but suffers from significant problems of 
              "flat
              triangles" on peaks, valley bottoms, and along ridges and valleys.

              TOPOGRID is a tool which attempts to produce an 
erosionally-correct
              landscape, but in my experience it still has problems where the 
              data
              density varies widely over a region. There is a reference in the
              ARC/INFO documentation to a paper in which the algorithm(s) for 
              TOPOGRID
              are given, but I have not dug up that paper so I don't know in 
              detail
              how it works. It is clear, however, that in part at least it's 
              based
              on some kind of polynomial or spline fitting, because in areas of 
              low
              data density (e.g. a valley floor next to a steep mountain front), 
              I've
              seen long-wavelength "waves" between control points that look like
              functional surfaces in underconstrained areas.

              I've done some work with fractal interpolations, but have nothing 
              like
              a tool ready to distribute. The basic idea is to estimate, from 
the
              available information, the fractal dimension of the landscape in a
              particular region, to make the assumption that the landscape is, 
in
              fact, fractal, and then to interpolate a continuous, truly fractal
              landscape from the control points. It, like all of the others, is
              only as good as the assumptions going into it, and clearly there 
              are
              areas where topography is not fractal over the entire range, or is
              multifractal, etc.]


              THE SOLUTIONS PROPOSED AND HOW THEY WORKED FOR ME

              The best solution I tried has been suggested by Andrew Loughhead
              [loughhead@ffp.csiro.au] and is reported in the paper:

              Mitasova, H. J Hofierka, M Zlocha, LR Iverson (1996) Modelling
              topographic potential for erosion and deposition using GIS.
              Int. J. Geographical Information Systems, vol 10, no.5, pp 
629-641.

              In section 4.2 on page 636, titled 'Region in the Yakima Ridge', 
is
              reported an example of 'waves along the 20m contour interval', and
              how they dealt with it. This pretty much what I tried to do.


              First I have derived a DEM (10 m pixel) using Topogrid 
              interpolating
              contours 25 m interval. From this DEM I have plotted contour 5 m
              spacing and than I have interpolated it again with TOPOGRID at the
              same horizontal resolution.

              Looking at the DEM's histogram some peaks are still visible, but
              this is the best result I was able to achieve.

              Plotting then the contour against the original one they show a 
              small
              error.

              A variation of this (but I didn't try it) would be:
              [build the DEM from contours once, then mask out from the DEM the
              cells lying underneath the original contours by turning them into
              NODATA, then to use the remaining grid cells as input points and
              building a new DEM from them]



              other solutions suggested:

              [Build the DEM from the contours and then use
              the VIP command against it to extract somewhere around 45% of the 
              most
              significant elevation points, then run TOPOGRID again using these 
              points as
              the input, rather than the contours.]

              Extracting 45% elevation points did not overcome the problem.
              Extracting 20% elevation points resulted in a less "wave" effect
              but also in too generalized DEM.


              [Use SPLINE Interpolation]

              I used the SPLINE function in GRID twice with both REGULARIZED and
              TENSION option but this did not overcome the problem of the "wave"
              effect.

              [Use createtin & tinlattice, using the contours both as
              mass data and as soft breaklines ]

              This solution did not overcome the problem.

              [Generalize the contour to reduce the vertices]

              Did not work if just used individually


              [Generalize the grid to a coarser cell size, then resample to
              the original cell size. Use the RESAMPLE function for both steps,
              and use either bilinear or cubic interpolation]

              This solution did not work either.

              [Convert the contour coverage (line) in to a polygon and then
              topogrid it]

              It did not work.


              Solution I did not try:

              [change the tolerance 'horizontal_std_err'.
              See the TOPOGRID command reference. Increasing it from its default 
              of
              1.0 will cause the DEM to be somewhat more generalized, but less 
              biased
              towards the contour interval values]

              Unfortunately in the version of A/I I'm running (v.7.0.2) there is
              no possibility to change the 'horizontal_std_err'.
              This option has been introduced with A/I 7.1.

              COMMENTS

              After exploring most of the solution proposed it is clear that
              it is very hard to get rid of artefacts like these once the DEM is
              made, at least without introducing more artefacts.
              The best way is to change the way the DEM is made.

              Please email to me for any suggestions or comments




              Domenico Capolongo
              Universita' degli Studi di Bari
              Dip. Geologia e Geofisica
              email: capolongo@geo.uniba.it


              at the moment:

              School of Earth, Environmental and Physical Sciences
              University of Portsmouth
              Burnaby Road
              Portsmouth
              PO1 3QL
              UK


 
